---
title: Healthy and Strong Nails
resourceId:
  - https://www.healthline.com/nutrition/vitamins-for-nails
---

## Vitamins and Nutrients

Nail beds constantly give rise to nail tissue, and adequate vitamin, mineral and
nutrient intakes help support the growth, formation and strength of new nail
cells.

A change in the appearance, texture or shape of your nails could indicate
nutrient deficiencies.

### Biotin

Biotin is a B-complex vitamin, also known as vitamin B7, coenzyme R and vitamin
H.

It promotes healthy cell growth and aids in the metabolism of protein-building
amino acids that are essential for nail growth.

Biotin-rich foods and supplements may help strengthen your brittle fingernails.
A few small studies support biotin supplement use to that effect ([1](), [2](),
[3]()).

One study in 35 people with brittle fingernails found that 2.5 mg of biotin per
day for six weeks to seven months improved symptoms in 63% of participants
([2]()).

Deficiency in this vitamin is rare, and while there is no Recommended Dietary
Allowance (RDA) for biotin, the Adequate Intake (AI) recommendation for adults
has been set at 30 mcg per day ([4]()).

Biotin is most concentrated in organ meats such as liver, but can also be found
in egg yolk, dairy products, yeast, salmon, avocado, sweet potato, nuts, seeds
and even cauliflower.

**Summary:** Biotin deficiency is rare, but consuming biotin through foods or
supplements may help strengthen brittle nails and improve their growth.

### Other B Vitamins

Other B vitamins are also important for nail health.

Vitamin B12 plays a role in iron absorption, as well as the development of red
blood cells. Both iron and B12 are necessary for keeping nails strong and
healthy.

A deficiency in vitamin B12 can result in entirely blue nails, bluish-black
pigments with wavy longitudinal dark streaks and brownish pigmentation ([5](),
[6]()).

Likewise, folate, or vitamin B9, is important for nail growth and health by
contributing to red blood cell formation and the development of new cells.

A deficiency in folate can cause a pigment change in your nails and make them
rigid and brittle ([7]()).

To prevent deficiencies, adults require 2.4 mcg of vitamin B12 and 400 mcg of
folate per day, though pregnant women have an increased need ([4]()).

Folate can be found in dark green vegetables, citrus fruits, beans, peas,
lentils, nuts, seeds and avocado. On the other hand, B12 is primarily found in
animal foods, such as meat, poultry, fish, eggs and dairy, though it can be
fortified into other foods and beverages.

**Summary:** Both vitamin B12 and folate play a role in red blood cell
production and oxygen transportation to nail cells. Inadequacies can result in
discoloration of your nails.

### Iron

### Magnesium

### Protein

### Omega-3 Fatty Acids

### Vitamin C

### Zinc

### Supplements vs Food Sources

### The Bottom Line
