---
title: "Computer Networking: A Top-Down Approach"
resourceId: "9780135928738"
stoppedAt: "Access in the Enterprise (and the Home): Ethernet and WiFi"
---

## Computer Networks and the Internet

### What Is the Internet?

#### A Nuts-and-Bolts Description

In Internet jargon, all of these devices are called **hosts** or **end
systems**.

<Figure src="/media/some-pieces-of-the-internet.png">
  Some pieces of the Internet.
</Figure>

End systems are connected together by a network of **communication links** and
**packet switches**. Many types of communication links, which are made up of
different types of physical media, including coaxial cable, copper wire, optical
fiber, and radio spectrum. Differents links can transmit data at different
rates, with the **transmission rate** of a link measured in bits/second. When
one end system has data to send to another end system, the sending end system
segments the data and adds header bytes to each segment. The resulting packages
of information, known as **packets** in the jargon of computer networks, are
then sent through the network to the destination end system, where they are
reassembled into the original data.

A packet switch takes a packet arriving on one of its incoming communication
links and forwards that packet on one of its outgoing communication links. The
two most prominent types of packet switches in today’s Internet are **routers**
and **link-layer switches**. Both types of switches forward packets toward their
ultimate destinations. Link-layer switches are typically used in access
networks, while routers are typically used in the network core.

The sequence of communication links and packet switches traversed by a packet
from the sending end system to the receiving end system is known as a **route**
or **path** through the network.

End systems access the Internet through **Internet Service Providers (ISPs)**.
Each ISP is in itself a network of packet switches and communication links. ISPs
provide a variety of types of network access to the end systems. ISPs also
provide Internet access to content providers, connecting servers directly to the
Internet. The Internet is all about connecting end systems to each other, ISPs
that provide access to end systems must also be interconnected. These lowertier
ISPs are thus interconnected through national and international upper-tier ISPs
and these upper-tier ISPs are connected directly to each other. An upper-tier
ISP consists of high-speed routers interconnected with high-speed fiber-optic
links. Each ISP network, whether upper-tier or lower-tier, is managed
independently, runs the IP protocol, and conforms to certain naming and address
conventions.

End systems, packet switches, and other pieces of the Internet run **protocols**
that control the sending and receiving of information within the Internet. The
**Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)** and the **Internet Protocol (IP)** are
two of the most important protocols in the Internet. The IP protocol specifies
the format of the packets that are sent and received among routers and end
systems. The Internet’s principal protocols are collectively known as
**TCP/IP**.

Given the importance of protocols to the Internet, it’s important that everyone
agree on what each and every protocol does, so that people can create systems
and products that interoperate. This is where standards come into play.
**Internet standards** are developed by the **Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF)**. The IETF standards documents are called **requests for comments
(RFCs)**. RFCs started out as general requests for comments to resolve network
and protocol design problems that faced the precursor to the Internet. They
define protocols such as TCP, IP, HTTP and SMTP. Other bodies also specify
standards for network components, most notably for network links.

#### A Services Description

_An infrastructure that provides services to applications._

The applications are said to be **distributed applications**, since they involve
multiple end systems that exchange data with each other.

End systems attached to the Internet provide a **socket interface** that
specifies how a program running on one end system asks the Internet
infrastructure to deliver data to a specific destination program running on
another end system.

#### What Is a Protocol?

<Figure src="/media/human-protocol-network-protocol.png">
  A human protocol and a computer network protocol.
</Figure>

All activity in the Internet that involves two or more communicating remote
entities is governed by a protocol.

A **protocol** defines the format and the order of messages exchanged between
two or more communicating entities, as well as the actions taken on the
transmission and/or receipt of a message or other event.

The Internet, and computer networks in general, make extensive use of protocols.
Different protocols are used to accomplish different communication tasks.

### The Network Edge

End systems are also referred to as _hosts_ because they host (that is, run)
application programs.

Hosts are sometimes further divided into two categories: **clients** and
**servers**.

#### Access Networks

The access network is the network that physically connects an end system to the
first router (also known as the “edge router”) on a path from the end system to
any other distant end system.

<Figure src="/media/access-networks.png">Access networks.</Figure>

##### Home Access: DSL, Cable, FTTH, and 5G Fixed Wireless

Today, the two most prevalent types of broadband residential access are
**digital subscriber line (DSL)** and cable. A residence typically obtains DSL
Internet access from the same local telephone company (telco) that provides its
wired local phone access. Thus, when DSL is used, a customer’s telco is also its
ISP. each customer’s DSL modem uses the existing telephone line exchange data
with a digital subscriber line access multiplexer (DSLAM) located in the telco’s
local central office (CO). The home’s DSL modem takes digital data and
translates it to high- frequency tones for transmission over telephone wires to
the CO; the analog signals from many such houses are translated back into
digital format at the DSLAM.

The residential telephone line carries both data and traditional telephone
signals simultaneously, which are encoded at different frequencies:

- A high-speed downstream channel, in the 50 kHz to 1 MHz band
- A medium-speed upstream channel, in the 4 kHz to 50 kHz band
- An ordinary two-way telephone channel, in the 0 to 4 kHz band

This approach makes the single DSL link appear as if there were three separate
links, so that a telephone call and an Internet connection can share the DSL
link at the same time. On the customer side, a splitter separates the data and
telephone signals arriving to the home and forwards the data signal to the DSL
modem. On the telco side, in the CO, the DSLAM separates the data and phone
signals and sends the data into the Internet. Hundreds or even thousands of
households connect to a single DSLAM.

<Figure src="/media/dsl-internet-access.png">DSL Internet access.</Figure>

The DSL standards define multiple transmission rates, including downstream
transmission rates of 24 Mbs and 52 Mbs, and upstream rates of 3.5 Mbps and 16
Mbps; the newest standard provides for aggregate upstream plus downstream rates
of 1 Gbps. Because the downstream and upstream rates are different, the access
is said to be asymmetric. The actual downstream and upstream transmission rates
achieved may be less than the rates noted above, as the DSL provider may
purposefully limit a residential rate when tiered service (different rates,
available at different prices) are offered. The maximum rate is also limited by
the distance between the home and the CO, the gauge of the twisted-pair line and
the degree of electrical interference. Engineers have expressly designed DSL for
short distances between the home and the CO; generally, if the residence is not
located within 5 to 10 miles.

While DSL makes use of the telco’s existing local telephone infrastructure,
**cable Internet access** makes use of the cable television company’s existing
cable television infrastructure. A residence obtains cable Internet access from
the same company that provides its cable television. Fiber optics connect the
cable head end to neighborhood-level junctions, from which traditional coaxial
cable is then used to reach individual houses and apartments. Each neighborhood
junction typically supports 500 to 5,000 homes. Because both fiber and coaxial
cable are employed in this system, it is often referred to as hybrid fiber coax
(HFC).

<Figure src="/media/hfc-access-network.png">
  A hybrid fiber-coaxial access network.
</Figure>

At the cable head end, the cable modem termination system (CMTS) serves a
similar function as the DSL network’s DSLAM— turning the analog signal sent from
the cable modems in many downstream homes back into digital format.

Cable modems divide the HFC network into two channels, a downstream and an
upstream channel. As with DSL, access is typically asymmetric, with the
downstream channel typically allocated a higher transmission rate than the
upstream channel. The DOCSIS 2.0 and 3.0 standards define downstream bitrates of
40 Mbps and 1.2 Gbps, and upstream rates of 30 Mbps and 100 Mbps, respectively.
As in the case of DSL networks, the maximum achievable rate may not be realized
due to lower contracted data rates or media impairments.

One important characteristic of cable Internet access is that it is a shared
broadcast medium. In particular, every packet sent by the head end travels
downstream on every link to every home and every packet sent by a home travels
on the upstream channel to the head end. For this reason, if several users are
simultaneously downloading a video file on the downstream channel, the actual
rate at which each user receives its video file will be significantly lower than
the aggregate cable downstream rate. On the other hand, if there are only a few
active users and they are all Web surfing, then each of the users may actually
receive Web pages at the full cable downstream rate, because the users will
rarely request a Web page at exactly the same time. Because the upstream channel
is also shared, a distributed multiple access protocol is needed to coordinate
transmissions and avoid collisions.

Although DSL and cable networks currently represent the majority of residential
broadband access in the United States, an up-and-coming technology that provides
even higher speeds is **fiber to the home (FTTH)**. As the name suggests, the
FTTH concept is simple—provide an optical fiber path from the CO directly to the
home. FTTH can potentially provide Internet access rates in the gigabits per
second range.

There are several competing technologies for optical distribution from the CO to
the homes. The simplest optical distribution network is called direct fiber,
with one fiber leaving the CO for each home. More commonly, each fiber leaving
the central office is actually shared by many homes; it is not until the fiber
gets relatively close to the homes that it is split into individual
customer-specific fibers. There are two competing optical-distribution network
architectures that perform this splitting: active optical networks (AONs) and
passive optical networks (PONs). AON is essentially switched Ethernet.

Here, we briefly discuss PON, which is used in Verizon’s FiOS service. Each home
has an optical network terminator (ONT), which is connected by dedicated optical
fiber to a neighborhood splitter. The splitter combines a number of homes
(typically less than 100) onto a single, shared optical fiber, which connects to
an optical line terminator (OLT) in the telco’s CO. The OLT, providing
conversion between optical and electrical signals, connects to the Internet via
a telco router. At home, users connect a home router (typically a wireless
router) to the ONT and access the Internet via this home router. In the PON
architecture, all packets sent from OLT to the splitter are replicated at the
splitter (similar to a cable head end).

In addition to DSL, Cable, and FTTH, **5G fixed wireless** is beginning to be
deployed. 5G fixed wireless not only promises high-speed residential access, but
will do so without installing costly and failure-prone cabling from the telco’s
CO to the home. With 5G fixed wireless, using beam-forming technology, data is
sent wirelessly from a provider’s base station to the a modem in the home. A
WiFi wireless router is connected to the modem (possibly bundled together),
similar to how a WiFi wireless router is connected to a cable or DSL modem.

<Figure src="/media/ftth-internet-access.png">
  FTTH Internet access using the PON distribution architecture.
</Figure>

##### Access in the Enterprise (and the Home): Ethernet and WiFi

## Application Layer

## Transport Layer

## The Network Layer: Data Plane

## The Network Layer: Control Plane

## The Link Layer and LANs

## Wireless and Mobile Networks

## Security in Computer Networks
