---
title: Computer Networks, Global Edition
resourceId: "9781292374017"
stoppedAt: Types of Computer Networks
---

## Introduction

### Uses of Computer Networks

The old model of a single computer serving all of the organizationâ€™s
computational needs has been replaced by one in which a large number of separate
but interconnected computers do the job. These systems are called **computer
networks**.

Throughout the book, we will use the term "computer network" to mean a
collection of interconnected, autonomous computing devices. Two computers are
said to be interconnected if they can exchange information. Interconnection can
take place over a variety of transmission media including copper wire, fiber
optic cable, and radio waves (e.g., microwave, infrared, communication
satellites).

#### Access to Information

Much information on the Internet is accessed using a client-server model, where
a client explicitly requests information from a server that hosts that
information.

<Figure src="/media/two-clients-one-server.png" alt="TODO">
  A network with two clients and one server.
</Figure>

The **client-server model** is widely used and forms the basis of much network
usage. The most popular realization is that of a **Web application**, where a
server generates Web pages based on its database in response to client requests
that may update the database.

If we look at the client-server model, to a first approximation we see that two
processes (running programs) are involved, one on the client machine and one on
the server machine. Communication takes the form of the client process sending a
message over the network to the server process. The client process then waits
for a reply message. When the server process gets the request, it performs the
requested work or looks up the requested data and sends back a reply.

<Figure src="/media/client-server-model.png" alt="TODO">
  The client-server model involves requests and replies.
</Figure>

Another popular model for accessing information is **peer-to-peer**
communication. In this form, individuals who form a loose group can communicate
with others in the group. Every person can, in principle, communicate with one
or more other people; there is no fixed division into clients and servers.

<Figure src="/media/peer-to-peer-system.png" alt="TODO">
  In a peer-to-peer system, there are no fixed clients and servers.
</Figure>

Many peer-to-peer systems, such as BitTorrent, do not have a central database of
content. Instead, each user maintains a local database of content, as well as a
list of other members of the system. A new user can then go to any existing
member to see what he has and get the names of other members to inspect for more
content and more names. This lookup process can be repeated indefinitely to
build up a large local database of what is out there.

#### Person-to-Person Communication

Many Internet users now rely on some form of **instant messaging** to
communicate with other people on the Internet. This facility, derived from the
UNIX _talk_ program in use since around 1970, allows two people to type messages
at each other in real time.

There are also multi-person messaging services too (Twitter).

The Internet can be used by applications to carry audio (e.g., Internet radio
stations, streaming music services) and video (e.g., Netflix, YouTube).

In the long run, the use of networks to enhance human-to-human communication may
prove more important than any of the others. It may become hugely important to
people who are geographically challenged, giving them the same access to
services as people living in the middle of a big city.

Between person-to-person communications and accessing information are **social
network** applications. In these applications, the flow of information is driven
by the relationships that people declare between each other. One of the most
popular social networking sites is Facebook. It lets people create and update
their personal profiles and shares the updates with other people who they have
declared to be their friends. Other social networking applications can make
introductions via friends of friends, send news messages to friends, such as
Twitter above, and much more.

Even more loosely, groups of people can work together to create content. A
**wiki**, for example, is a collaborative Web site that the members of a
community edit. The most famous wiki is the **Wikipedia**, an encyclopedia
anyone can read or edit, but there are thousands of other wikis.

#### Electronic Commerce

Online shopping is already popular; users can browse the online catalogs of
thousands of companies and have products shipped right to their doorsteps. After
the customer buys a product electronically but cannot figure out how to use it,
online technical support may be consulted.

Another area in which e-commerce is widely used is access to financial
institutions. Many people already pay their bills, manage their bank accounts,
and even handle their investments electronically. Financial technology or
"fintech" applications allow users to conduct a wide variety of financial
transactions online, including transferring money between bank accounts, or even
between friends.

Online auctions of second-hand goods have become a massive industry. Unlike
traditional e-commerce, which follows the client-server model, online auctions
are peer-to-peer in the sense that consumers can act as both buyers and sellers,
although there is a central server that holds the database of products for sale.

Some forms of e-commerce:

- **B2C** (_Business-to-consumer_). Example: Ordering books online.
- **B2B** (_Business-to-business_). Example: Car manufacturer ordering tires
  from a supplier.
- **G2C** (_Governement-to-consumer_). Example: Government distributing tax
  forms electronically.
- **C2C** (_Consumer-to-consumer_). Auctioning second-hand products online.
- **P2P** (_Peer-to-peer_). Music of file sharing; Skype.

#### Entertainment

Our fourth category is entertainment. This has made huge strides in the home in
recent years, with the distribution of music, radio and television programs, and
movies over the Internet beginning to rival that of traditional mechanisms.
Users can find, buy, and download MP3 songs and high-definition movies and add
them to their personal collection. TV shows now reach many homes via **IPTV (IP
Television)** systems that are based on IP technology instead of cable TV or
radio transmissions. Media streaming applications let users tune to Internet
radio stations or watch recent episodes of their favorite TV shows or movies.
Naturally, all of this content can be moved around your house between different
devices, displays, and speakers, usually via a wireless network.

Soon, it may be possible to search for any movie or television program ever
made, in any country, and have it be displayed on your screen instantly. New
films may become interactive, where the user is occasionally prompted for the
story direction (should Macbeth murder the king or just bide his time?) with
alternative scenarios provided for all cases. Live television may also become
interactive, with the audience participating in quiz shows, choosing among
contestants, and so on.

Another form of entertainment is game playing. Already we have multi-person
real-time simulation games, like hide-and-seek in a virtual dungeon, and flight
simulators with the players on one team trying to shoot down the players on the
opposing team. Virtual worlds provide a persistent setting in which thousands of
users can experience a shared reality with three-dimensional graphics.

#### The Internet of Things

**Ubiquitous computing** entails computing that is embedded in everyday life as
in the vision of Mark Weiser (1991). Many homes are already wired with security
systems that include door and window sensors. Also, there are many more sensors
that can be folded into a smart home monitor, such as energy consumption. Smart
electricity, gas, and water meters report usage over the network. This
functionality saves the company money as there is then no need to send people to
read the meters. Smoke detectors can call the fire department instead of just
making a big noise (which has little value if no one is home). Smart
refrigerators could order more milk when it is almost gone. As the cost of
sensing and communication drops, more and more measurement and reporting will be
done with networks. This ongoing revolution, often referred to as the **IoT
(Internet of Things)**, is poised to connect just about every electronic device
we purchase to the Internet.

Increasingly, consumer electronic devices are networked. For example, some
high-end cameras already have a wireless network capability and use it to send
photos to a nearby display for viewing. Professional sports photographers can
also send their photos to their editors in real-time, first wirelessly to an
access point then over the Internet. Devices such as televisions that plug into
the wall can use **power-line networks** to send information throughout the
house over the wires that carry electricity. It may not be very surprising to
have these objects on the network, but objects that we do not think of as
computers may sense and communicate information too. For example, your shower
may record water usage, give you visual feedback while you lather up, and report
to a home environmental monitoring application when you are done to help save on
your water bill.

### Types of Computer Networks

#### Broadband Access Networks

Internet access provides home users with **connectivity** to remote computers.

Today, broadband access networks are proliferating. In many parts of the
world, broadband access is delivered to homes through copper (e.g., telephone
lines), coaxial cable (e.g., cable), or optical fiber. The speeds of broadband Internet
access continue to increase as well, with many broadband access providers in developed
countries delivering a gigabit per second to individual homes. In some
parts of the world, particularly in developing regions, the predominant mode of Internet
access is mobile.

#### Mobile and Wireless Access Networks



### Network Technology, from Local to Global

### Examples of Networks

### Network Protocols

### Reference Models

### Standardization

### Policy, Legal, and Social Issues

### Metric Units

## The Physical Layer

### Guided Transmission Media

### Wireless Transmission

### Using the Spectrum for Transmission

### From Waveforms to Bits

### The Public Switched Telephone Network

### Cellular Networks

### Cable Networks

### Communication Satellites

### Comparing Different Access Networks

### Policy at the Physical Layer

## The Data Link Layer

### Data Link Layer Design Issues

### Error Detection and Correction

### Elementary Data Link Protocols

### Improving Efficiency

### Data Link Protocols in Practice

## The Medium Access Control Sublayer

### The Channel Allocation Problem

### Multiple Access Protocols

### Ethernet

### Wireless LANs

### Bluetooth

### DOCSIS

### Data Link Layer Switching

## The Network Layer

### Network Layer Design Issues

### Routing Algorithms in a Single Network

### Traffic Management at the Network Layer

### Quality of Service and Application QoE

### Internetworking

### Software-Defined Networking

### The Network Layer in the Internet

### Policy at the Network Layer

## The Transport Layer

### The Transport Service

### Elements of Transport Protocols

### Congestion Control

### The Internet Transport Protocols: UDP

### The Internet Transport Protocols: TCP

### Transport Protocols and Congestion Control

### Performance Issues

## The Application Layer

### The Domain Name System (DNS)

### Electronic Mail

### The World Wide Web

### Streaming Audio and Video

### Content Delivery

## Network Security

### Fundamentals of Network Security

### The Core Ingredients of an Attack

### Firewalls and Intrusion Detection Systems

### Cryptography

### Symmetric-Key Algorithms

### Public-Key Algorithms

### Digital Signatures

### Management of Public Keys

### Authentication Protocols

### Communication Security

### Email Security

### Web Security

### Social Issues

## Reading List and Bibliography

### Suggestions for Further Reading
