---
title: C# 9 and .NET 5 â€“ Modern Cross-Platform Development
resourceId: "9781800568105"
stoppedAt: Building console apps using Visual Studio Code
---

## Hello, C#! Welcome, .NET!

### Setting up your development environment

In Visual Studio Code, to support C# 9, you should install the C# extension.

### Understanding .NET

#### Understanding .NET Framework

.NET Framework is a development platform that includes a **Common Language
Runtime (CLR)**, which manages the execution of code, and a **Base Class Library
(BCL)**, which provides a rich library of classes to build applications from.
Microsoft originally designed .NET Framework to have the possibility of being
cross-platform, but Microsoft put their implementation effort into making it
work best with Windows.

Since .NET Framework 4.5.2 it has been an official component of the Windows
operating system. .NET Framework is installed on over one billion computers so
it must change as little as possible. Even bug fixes can cause problems, so it
is updated infrequently.

All of the apps on a computer written for .NET Framework share the same version
of the CLR and libraries stored in the **Global Assembly Cache (GAC)**, which
can lead to issues if some of them need a specific version for compatibility.

**Note:** Good Practice: Practically speaking, .NET Framework is Windows-only
and a legacy platform. Do not create new apps using it.

#### Understanding the Mono and Xamarin projects

Third parties developed a .NET Framework implementation named the **Mono**
project. Mono is cross-platform, but it fell well behind the official
implementation of .NET Framework.

Mono has found a niche as the foundation of the **Xamarin** mobile platform as
well as cross-platform game development platforms like **Unity**.

Microsoft purchased Xamarin in 2016 and now gives away what used to be an
expensive Xamarin extension for free with Visual Studio 2019.

#### Understanding .NET Core

Today, we live in a truly cross-platform world where modern mobile and cloud
development have made Windows, as an operating system, much less important.
Because of that, Microsoft has been working on an effort to decouple .NET from
its close ties with Windows. While rewriting .NET Framework to be truly
cross-platform, they've taken the opportunity to refactor and remove major parts
that are no longer considered core.

This new product was branded .NET Core and includes a cross-platform
implementation of the CLR known as **CoreCLR** and a streamlined library of
classes known as **CoreFX**.

#### Understanding .NET 5 and the journey to one .NET

At the Microsoft Build developer conference in May 2020, the .NET team announced
that their plans for the unification of .NET had been delayed. They said .NET 5
would be released on November 10, 2020 and it would unify all the various .NET
platforms except mobile. It will not be until .NET 6 in November 2021 that
mobile will also be supported by the unified .NET platform.

.NET Core has been renamed .NET and the major version number has skipped the
number four to avoid confusion with .NET Framework 4.x.

#### Understanding .NET support

.NET versions are either **Long-Term Support (LTS)** or **Current**:

- **LTS** releases are stable and require fewer updates over their lifetime.
  These are a good choice for applications that you do not intend to update
  frequently. LTS releases will be supported for 3 years after general
  availability.
- **Current** releases include features that may change based on feedback. These
  are a good choice for applications that you are actively developing because
  they provide access to the latest improvements. After a 3-month maintenance
  period, the previous minor version will no longer be supported.

#### Understanding .NET Runtime and .NET SDK versions

You can see which SDKs and runtimes are currently installed using the following
commands:

```shell
dotnet --list-sdks
dotnet --list-runtimes
```

#### Understanding intermediate language

The C# compiler (named **Roslyn**) used by the `dotnet` CLI tool converts your
C# source code into **intermediate language (IL)** code and stores the IL in an
assembly (a DLL or EXE file). IL code statements are like assembly language
instructions, which are executed by .NET's virtual machine, known as CoreCLR.

At runtime, CoreCLR loads the IL code from the assembly, the **just-in-time
(JIT)** compiler compiles it into native CPU instructions, and then it is
executed by the CPU on your machine. The benefit of this three-step compilation
process is that Microsoft is able to create CLRs for Linux and macOS, as well as
for Windows. The same IL code runs everywhere because of the second compilation
process, which generates code for the native operating system and CPU
instruction set.

Regardless of which language the source code is written in, for example, C#,
Visual Basic, or F#, all .NET applications use IL code for their instructions
stored in an assembly. Microsoft and others provide disassembler tools that can
open an assembly and reveal this IL code, such as the ILSpy .NET Decompiler
extension.

### Building console apps using Visual Studio Code

## Speaking C#

## Controlling Flow and Converting Types

## Writing, Debugging, and Testing Functions

## Building Your Own Types with Object-Oriented Programming

## Implementing Interfaces and Inheriting Classes

## Understanding and Packaging .NET Types

## Working with Common .NET Types

## Working with Files, Streams, and Serialization

## Protecting Your Data and Applications

## Working with Databases Using Entity Framework Core

## Querying and Manipulating Data Using LINQ

## Improving Performance and Scalability Using Multitasking

## Introducing Practical Applications of C# and .NET

## Building Websites Using ASP.NET Core Razor Pages

## Building Websites Using the Model-View-Controller Pattern

## Building Websites Using a Content Management System

## Building and Consuming Web Services

## Building Intelligent Apps Using Machine Learning

## Building Web User Interfaces Using Blazor

## Building Cross-Platform Mobile Apps
