---
title: Male Fertility
resourceId: https://www.healthline.com/health/boost-male-fertility-sperm-count
stoppedAt: Try tribulus terrestris
---

## Boost Male Fertility and Increase Sprem Count

Infertility affects about one in every six couples, and researchers estimate
about one in every three cases is due to fertility problems in the male partner
alone ((1)[], (2)[]).

While infertility is not always treatable, there are some things you can do to
boost your chances of conceiving. Fertility can sometimes be improved with a
healthy diet, supplements, and other lifestyle strategies.

## What is male infertility?

Fertility refers to people’s ability to reproduce without medical assistance.

Male infertility is when a man has a poor chance of making his female partner
pregnant. It usually depends on the quality of his sperm cells.

Sometimes infertility is linked to sexual function, and other times it could be
linked to semen quality. Here are some examples of each:

- **Libido.** Otherwise known as sex drive, libido describes a person’s desire
  to have sex. Foods or supplements that claim to increase libido are called
  aphrodisiacs.
- **Erectile dysfunction.** Also known as impotence, erectile dysfunction is
  when a man is unable to develop or maintain an erection.
- **Sperm count.** An important aspect of semen quality is the number or
  concentration of sperm cells in a given amount of semen.
- **Sperm motility.** An essential function of healthy sperm cells is their
  ability to swim. Sperm motility is measured as the percentage of moving sperm
  cells in a sample of semen.
- **Testosterone levels.** Low levels of testosterone, the male sex hormone, may
  be responsible for infertility in some men.

Infertility can have multiple causes and may depend on genetics, general health,
fitness, diseases, and dietary contaminants.

## Take D-aspartic acid supplements

D-aspartic acid (D-AA) is a form of aspartic acid, a type of amino acid that’s
sold as a dietary supplement.

Researchers believe that D-AA is implicated in male fertility. In fact, D-AA
levels are significantly lower in infertile men than fertile men ([3]()).

This is supported by studies showing that D-AA supplements may increase levels
of testosterone, the male sex hormone that plays an essential role in male
fertility.

For example, a study in infertile men suggested that taking 2.7 grams of D-AA
for 3 months increased their testosterone levels by 30–60% and sperm count and
motility by 60–100%.

The number of pregnancies also increased among their partners ([4]()).

Another controlled study in healthy men showed that taking 3 grams of D-AA
supplements daily for 2 weeks increased testosterone levels by 42% ([5]()).

However, the evidence is not consistent. Studies in athletes or strength-trained
men with normal to high testosterone levels found that D-AA didn’t increase its
levels further and even reduced them at high doses ([6](), [7]()).

The current evidence indicates that D-AA supplements may improve fertility in
men with low testosterone levels, while they don’t consistently provide
additional benefits in men with normal to high levels.

## Exercise regularly

Besides being good for your general health, exercising regularly can boost
testosterone levels and improve fertility.

Studies show that men who exercise regularly have higher testosterone levels and
better semen quality than inactive men ([8](), [9](), [10]()).

However, you should avoid too much exercise, as it may have the opposite effect
and potentially reduce testosterone levels. Getting the right amount of zinc can
minimize this risk ([11](), [12](), [13]()).

## Get enough vitamin C

You’re probably familiar with vitamin C’s ability to boost the immune system.

Some evidence indicates that taking antioxidant supplements, such as vitamin C,
may improve fertility.

Oxidative stress is when levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) reach harmful
levels in the body.

It happens when the body’s own antioxidant defenses are overwhelmed because of
disease, old age, an unhealthy lifestyle, or environmental pollutants ([14](),
[15](), [16]()).

ROS are constantly being produced in the body, but their levels are kept in
check in healthy people. High levels of ROS may promote tissue injury and
inflammation, increasing the risk of chronic disease ([17]()).

There’s also some evidence that oxidative stress and excessively high levels of
ROS may lead to infertility in men ([18](), [19]()).

Taking in enough antioxidants, such as vitamin C, may help counteract some of
these harmful effects. There’s also some evidence that vitamin C supplements may
improve semen quality.

A study in infertile men showed that taking 1,000-mg vitamin C supplements twice
a day for up to 2 months increased sperm motility by 92% and sperm count by more
than 100%. It also reduced the proportion of deformed sperm cells by 55%
([20]()).

Another observational study in Indian industrial workers suggested that taking
1,000 mg of vitamin C five times a week for 3 months may protect against DNA
damage caused by ROS in sperm cells.

Vitamin C supplements also significantly improved sperm count and motility,
while reducing the numbers of deformed sperm cells ([21]()).

Taken together, these findings suggest that vitamin C may help improve fertility
in infertile men with oxidative stress.

## Relax and minimize stress

Stress may reduce your sexual satisfaction and impair your fertility ([22](),
[23](), [24]()).

Researchers believe the hormone cortisol may partly explain these adverse
effects of stress.

Prolonged stress raises levels of cortisol, which has strong negative effects on
testosterone. When cortisol goes up, testosterone levels tend to go down
([25](), [26]()).

While severe, unexplained anxiety is typically treated with medication, milder
forms of stress can be reduced with relaxation techniques.

Stress management can be as simple as taking a walk in nature, meditating,
exercising, or spending time with friends.

## Get enough vitamin D

Vitamin D can be important for male and female fertility. It’s another nutrient
that may boost testosterone levels.

One observational study showed that vitamin-D-deficient men were more likely to
have low testosterone levels ([27]()).

A controlled study in 65 men with low testosterone levels and vitamin D
deficiency supported these findings. Taking 3,000 IU of vitamin D3 every day for
1 year increased their testosterone levels by around 25% ([28]()).

High vitamin D levels are linked to greater sperm motility, but the evidence is
inconsistent ([29](), [30]()).

## Try tribulus terrestris

Tribulus terrestris, also known as puncture vine, is a medicinal herb frequently
used to enhance male fertility.

One study in men with low sperm counts showed that taking 6 grams of tribulus
root twice daily for 2 months improved erectile function and libido ([31]()).

While Tribulus terrestris does not raise testosterone levels, research indicates
that it may enhance the libido-promoting effects of testosterone ([32](),
[33](), [34]()).

However, further studies are needed to confirm its aphrodisiac properties and
evaluate the long-term risks and benefits of supplementing with it.

## Take fenugreek supplements

Fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum) is a popular culinary and medicinal herb.

One study in 30 men who strength-trained four times a week analyzed the effects
of taking 500 mg of fenugreek extract daily.

The men experienced significantly increased testosterone levels, strength, and
fat loss, compared with a placebo ([35]()).

Another study in 60 healthy men showed that taking 600 mg of Testofen, a
supplement made from fenugreek seed extract and minerals, daily for 6 weeks
improved libido, sexual performance, and strength ([36]()).

These findings were confirmed by another, larger study in 120 healthy men.
Taking 600 mg of Testofen every day for 3 months improved self-reported erectile
function and the frequency of sexual activity.

Also, the supplement significantly increased testosterone levels ([37]()).

Keep in mind that all of these studies examined fenugreek extracts. It’s
unlikely that whole fenugreek, which is used in cooking and herbal tea, is as
effective.

## Get enough zinc

Zinc is an essential mineral found in high amounts in animal foods, such as
meat, fish, eggs, and shellfish.

Getting enough zinc is one of the cornerstones of male fertility. Observational
studies show that low zinc status or deficiency is associated with low
testosterone levels, poor sperm quality, and an increased risk of male
infertility ([38]()).

Also, taking zinc supplements increases testosterone levels and sperm count in
those who are low in zinc ([39](), [40](), [41]()).

Furthermore, zinc supplements may reduce the decreased testosterone levels that
are associated with excessive amounts of high-intensity exercise ([12](),
[13]()).

Controlled trials need to confirm these observational findings.

## Consider ashwagandha

Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera) is a medicinal herb that’s been used in India
since ancient times.

Studies suggest that ashwagandha may improve male fertility by boosting
testosterone levels.

One study in men with low sperm cell counts showed that taking 675 mg of
ashwagandha root extract per day for 3 months significantly improved fertility.

Specifically, it increased sperm counts by 167%, semen volume by 53%, and sperm
motility by 57%, compared with levels at the start of the study. In comparison,
minimal improvements were detected among those who got a placebo treatment
([42]()).

Increased testosterone levels may be partly responsible for these benefits.

A study in 57 young men following a strength-training program showed that
consuming 600 mg of ashwagandha root extract daily significantly increased
testosterone levels, muscle mass, and strength, compared with a placebo
([43]()).

These findings are supported by observational evidence indicating that
ashwagandha supplements may improve sperm counts, sperm motility, antioxidant
status, and testosterone levels ([44](), [45]()).
